Rigorous statistical estimation of FMRI models
==============================================

Most current approaches to the statistical analysis of functional
magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) data involve varieties of
preprocessing steps which alter the signal to noise ratio of the
original data.

Enhancing the SNR prior to a formal analysis, though, shakes at primary
principles of statistical decision making and it will generally inflate
the type I error of the analysis.

This is the first statistical software tool which implements the
*rigorous statistical (RS)* estimator for FMRI data models, a new and
original method for the statistical analysis of FMRI data of brain
scans. The method fits a weighted least squares model to points of a
random vector field. Without prior spacial smoothings, i.e. without
altering the original 4D-image, the method nevertheless results in
smooth fits of the underlying activation parameter fields. More
importantly, though, the method yields a trustworthy estimate of the
uncertainty of the estimated activation field for each subject in a
study. The availability of these uncertainty fields allows to model FMRI
studies using random effects meta regression techniques acknowledging
the fact that (i) individual subjects are random entities, and that (ii)
the variability in the estimated individual activation patterns vary
across the brain and between subjects.

Installation
------------

An easy way to install fmristats is to install Anaconda3_, a cross
platform distribution for data analysis and scientific computing, and
then using pip_, the "PyPA recommended tool for installing Python
packages", to install fmristats itself.

.. code:: shell

    % pip install fmristats

Now, you should be good to go.

.. _Anaconda3: https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/

.. _pip: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip/

Tutorials
---------

Tutorials discussing various parts of fmristats; expect this list to
grow.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   tutorials/very-quick-start
   tutorials/quick-start
   tutorials/notes

Command line interface
----------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   cli

Modules
-------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   modules

Indices and tables
------------------

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

